[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So Mario crashed
and I did too,
again with Aizhan as a passenger
on the back of my bike.
A heavy responsibility,
it's also felt by Tiffany
and the fear of her children
losing their mother.
But the first sacred
peek of Kedarnath
has been traversed,
Jeff and Jen uniting
while Fred found his
inner Shiva, existing
beyond his fearful mind.
And perhaps we're all realizing
the value of being with someone
at somewhere where
we cannot escape.
It's a pilgrimage where facing
your mind and your conditioning
is a key to set you free.
>> Shiva says to the goddess,
the master to his beloved,
pay not attention to my
words, divine, feminine.
Pay attention to the
gap between my words.
Because in the gap,
you will find the being
and you will merge in it.
When you merge in the
being, all understanding
will dawn on you, because
you are it already.
And that's the base
of all teachings.
It takes a lot of courage.
It takes a deep understanding
of detachment, hmm?
of stepping in one's own power.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CAR HORN]
[ENERGETIC MUSIC]
This is not a journey
to feel better.
Do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
>> Sun rising in the Himalayas.
People are just waking up.
Heading to our second
peak today, to Tungnath.
And it's incredibly clear.
I hope we have a beautiful
view of the Himalayas today.
Already, we're
beginning to see them.
It's really magical.
Really magical.
Just really loud buzz going
on from the mountains.
>> On the topic of trying to
get clarity in terms of what's--
I don't even know if it's an
end game that we're after,
this transformation, or if
it's a continual process that
takes place through life.
But you know, I'm in the nascent
stages of being exposed to this
and understanding.
>> Anand says a lot.
He says, people so
often want to understand
before they fall in love.
He says, they all want to
understand, understand.
But pretty much everyone on
this trip without understanding
jumped in and took this trip.
You know?
They stepped into
love and something
they knew they needed to do
before they understood even
what the heck was going on.
And every day, we pretty
much don't know what--
>> There are a lot of
voids, no doubt about it.
>> And we just jump in.
So part of it's just that.
It's like, maybe you don't know
exactly what it's like there,
but you definitely know
you need to leave here.
And it's like, that's enough.
>> I think life is
all about learning,
and I don't think the
journey's ever over.
We have to continually learn.
We have to be continually
moving forward.
I definitely embrace it.
It's a series of steps.
And it is infinite,
and it's never over,
and we don't arrive at
some nirvana, we're done.
>> Interesting plausits.
>> Tungnath means the one
who can go through the crack.
See?
Tung means narrow,
and nath means
the lord, the lord of the gap.
And that's one of the
most profound art,
is the capacity to
exist in the gap.
Death, life, and the
moment in between.
That's the most profound
and powerful moment
in the journey we call life.
And I think that's one of the
things which we have really
lost, this art of
being in the gap.
The moment is a gap,
there is chit-chat.
The moment there's a
gap, there is phones.
The moment there
is a gap, there's
something we need to fill.
Can you exist in the gap?
That's why the meditation
at the twilight,
to be, to develop this art of
being in the gap more and more.
Hmm?
So today as we are
going up to Tungnath,
starting right now because we
are going on right now in 15
minutes, it's silent time.
Tongue rolled back and inwards,
unless you are in crisis
not of your ego, but real.
Only then you speak.
Otherwise, there is
really no reason.
Take your tongue, roll
it back, up, and inwards.
That's Kechari Mudra.
And be in the gap.
Yeah?
Beginning now, it's
all in the gap.
All right.
We'll leave in 15 minutes.
>> Today, we make the steep hike
up to Tungnath at 12,000 feet.
First, we get to the
main temple of Shiva.
Then there's another
1,000 feet to get
to the smaller but
incredibly sacred
temple of Chandrashila, the
feminine above the masculine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On the way up Tungnath, I
passed by an old guy who was
sitting on one of the stone
ledges they use as a rest.
And he got up the same
time I was passing by him,
so I offered him my
arm, and he took it.
And he just wanted a hand
up to the next rest stop.
And he talked to me
all the way up there.
And of course, I
didn't understand him
except for he told me
he was 97 years old.
And I immediately looked
at him and said, you're 97?
And he gave me a big,
almost toothless smile
and said, yeah, 97.
When we got to the
temple, he was there.
And as soon as I stepped
onto the temple ledge there,
he was just so happy to see me.
He was shaking my
hand and hugging me.
And that was his-- at 97,
he had to get up there
just to see that temple.
>> As we arrived at the first
temple of Tungnath at 12,000
feet, most of the group
is feeling quite winded.
And strangely, some
people have been
considering not going to the
higher and smaller temple.
It's another 1,000 feet
straight up and at a fast pace
in order to beat the
incoming veil of clouds.
>> This one was pretty
severe too, straight up.
And for some reason, when
I hit about 10,000 feet,
it really started-- you
know, every 100, 200 yards,
I had to stop and
catch my breath.
I was debating, really.
I was going to stay and
meditate at the temple.
And then I thought, no, no.
You didn't come here
to stay down below.
You want to go to the top.
So I went ahead and pushed
my way up to the top,
and it was great.
I'm so glad I did.
>> In the end, all the guys
and only two of the women--
that being Anna and Aizhan--
choose to make the journey up
to this higher feminine temple.
>> Keep on chanting,
and I felt very great.
Then when we reached the temple
and then went on and said,
OK, come on.
Like, people, who
wants to go up?
Let's follow.
And I just looked.
It's-- oh, OK.
It's probably another
half an hour going up.
But now I have no single
regret that I did it.
[BIRD CAWING]
>> I had no idea how
high we were going.
I didn't realize it was
over 12,000 feet up there.
But I felt nothing in terms
of oxygen or exertion.
Kind of a tireless
gait right up the hill.
And I had no idea
where we were going,
which was good, so I couldn't
have a preconceived notion
of destination at that point.
We had this incredible,
swirling clouds.
They were going up.
They were spinning.
And it was the first time I
felt real power and energy
emanating from mountains.
The mountains came alive.
And I start to get what people
talk about when they say,
you've got to come to
India and experience
the Himalayas and their power.
[SINGING]
>> See, this place is
called Chandrashila,
meaning the rock of the moon.
In the yogic symbology,
the yogi Shiva
is a picture with this crescent
moon, which symbolizes mastery
over the mind, and the new
moon representing regeneration
and after death, the new
birth, the quantum leap.
And so this ridge right here as
we stand on, if you look at it,
it's actually shaped
like a crescent moon.
Narrow.
Exactly like a crescent moon
from this temple, that temple,
to this temple.
That's why it's
called Chandrashila.
This is Shiva's temple.
Below it, Shiva visits.
And then on top of that
is the moon, the goddess.
The goddess, the feminine
is the regeneration,
is the new, the fresh.
Hmm?
So the goddess on top of
Shiva, always the feminine
above this masculine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I sprawled out and was just--
closed my eyes and
absorbing the sun.
And I had no idea.
I think I fell asleep.
And when I woke up,
I opened my eyes
and there was the most
spectacular hawk overhead.
The hawk has a special
meaning for me, because--
can you shut it down one second?
In 1994, I had a sister
who was very tragically
murdered, viciously murdered.
And she left three
beautiful children behind.
And you know, I
vowed from that point
forward to find real
purpose in her death.
The hawk became
symbolic of my sister,
because I used to drive out of
my driveway on a daily basis,
and gate would open, and
there'd be a hawk sitting there
on the telephone lines.
So it was kind of
her way and my way
of connecting with each other.
And that to me was
incredibly awe-inspiring.
I mean, I don't cry, but that
was a few times where tears--
and I talking to
others, everyone
seemed to have the same
feeling and impact where we all
started to cry in our
own private space.
>> And I just looked up and
out, and I just started crying,
because it was so majestic, the
way the clouds sort of wrapped
around the mountain.
And ever-changing.
Did not want to leave.
None of us wanted to leave.
>> Anand asked us all to be
totally quiet for the hike,
to practice going into the gap,
which is what Tungnath means,
the gap, to go
into the stillness.
And that was really
important for me,
I think for the
group in general,
to not talk and just
be with themselves.
And also for me, because
in getting to know Anand
and studying with him
for six years now,
I've asked him questions
like, how do you know
some of the things you know?
And he's amazed me with
some of his abilities.
And I won't go deep into it,
but one of the things he said
is that he just becomes
still like a clear pond.
And when you're still like
water, any ripple that comes,
you're able to see it.
So I'm practicing the
stillness and really existing
in that gap.
Any little ripple off a person,
off anything, you really
know what's going on.
So he's able to read people
quite quickly because of how
still and in the gap he exists.
And then in comes a ripple,
and he knows exactly what's
going on with that
person and that person
and that person, that person.
He can tell you very quickly.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> After taking in this
Himalayan peak in pure silence,
those who made the summit
descend to the group
at the lower Shiva temple,
forever altered by this
powerful experience.
>> I went inside the
temple, and Anand was there.
And I went before the
little sacred space
and said my prayers,
and the like.
And I generously
dropped in some money
into the box for the
maintenance of those facilities.
Then I turned to my right, and
there was an individual there
with a brass tray,
and he started
to paint on my face for
about 10, 15 seconds.
And then as soon as he was
done, he said in this tone,
(SHARPLY) now give me
money, in those exact words,
in that abruptness.
And I looked at him and
Anand looked at him.
And in an instant,
that feeling I
had of being awestruck and
incredible transformation that
transpired upon the peak
that we had hiked to
and spent a lot of
time upon went away.
About 10 minutes later, we
walked down to a little cafe,
and I sat with--
Anand came up and sat with me.
And I go into that temple.
Did my thing, dropped the
money in, turned to him,
he paints my face.
And immediately, give me money.
[FINGER SNAP] I changed.
>> And see, that's exactly--
>> Instantaneous.
>> You are that.
And that's what you
need to practice.
That's what we were talking
about last night, you see?
That's the bit-- when
you go to the true self,
then you're a witness to it.
It's not personal.
>> It's disconnected then.
>> Exactly.
It's not personal.
You observe it.
And what originates
from you is--
nothing inside of your
alters because you're not
dependent on it.
You don't need him to
be a certain way for you
to have your experience.
Otherwise, you're giving up your
power to an ignorant particle,
because we had a
profound experience.
>> Yeah.
That was the perfect
juxtaposition, actually,
to learn that.
>> Yeah, and that is what I
was trying to tell you that day
too.
Do not give your
power away to that.
Do you comprehend?
Look at the ignorant
particle and to observe.
Oh my god.
Do you understand?
May you be--
>> Feel sorry for him?
>> A little bit.
Or sometimes it's just
indifference, you see?
In the Yoga Sutra, Patanjali
says, the first thing
is to the wicked
is indifference.
It's too much to us in the
beginning to have compassion,
you know?
When somebody's
acting so disgusting.
So the first practice
is to be indifferent.
That really has no
power, no meaning.
Obviously, and even in the
social scheme of things,
they have n no
power, no meaning.
>> That's where they get.
That's where they
do have their power.
>> No.
>> In that domain.
In their mind.
>> In their mind.
In their story.
But in the truth, in the
reality, they have no meaning.
So indifferences
is the first one,
and then the second
can be feeling sorry.
They're just ignorant
particles, left and right.
>> Yeah.
>> But here, Shiva gives you
an opportunity to practice,
you see?
To not get into a
fairy tale land.
Life comes to you no
matter where you are.
Doesn't it?
>> Valuable lesson.
Like I said, to have the
two experiences juxtaposed
against each other
was ideal, actually.
>> Exactly.
So could that
little trigger rape
you of all that magnificence?
>> I won't let it now.
>> Exactly.
>> Just for a split
second, though.
>> Mm-hmm.
That's what we were
talking about last night.
>> Exactly.
>> That transcendence, you see?
That transcendent
consciousness that you
exist in a transcendental
consciousness, that you--
it's like children playing.
It has no meaning.
They don't have any power
to pull you left or right.
Your soul goes beyond that.
It has no meaning to you.
Say, OK.
It is a pig and it is a dog,
and it is an ignorant particle.
A dog is a dog is a dog.
That is the nature of a dog.
A scorpion is a
scorpion is a scorpion.
It's the nature of a scorpion.
Do you comprehend?
>> Yeah.
>> If you step on a scorpion
in LA, what will it do to you?
>> Sting you.
>> If you step on a
scorpion in Himalayas,
what will it do to you?
>> They don't have stingers?
>> [LAUGHS] They will sting you.
[LAUGHTER]
So no matter where you
step on the scorpion,
it will sting you.
It has nothing to do
with you or the location.
It is the nature of the scorpion
to sting when you step on it.
Do you comprehend?
>> Yeah.
>> So like, nature of ignorant
particle is to act ignorantly.
Now, whether you place
the ignorant particle
on the great
Himalayas, magnificent,
surrounded by great masters, or
you place the ignorant particle
in a community, you place that
ignorant particle in politics,
you place--
>> They're omnipresent.
No doubt about it.
>> Exactly.
So these people
exist everywhere,
the state of consciousness.
I mean, you go to
security at the airport,
they exist there too.
[LAUGHS]
>> It's just the ultimate irony
to have it exist right here.
>> But that's the
beauty of it, right?
That's the beauty of it.
That's what I was talking,
that the path is you.
It's not the path.
There is no path outside.
You are the path.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> As we headed
down from Tungnath,
Anna was running in
excitement down a shortcut,
but lost control and was
heading right for a cliff.
Had she not forced
herself to fall,
she would have gone right over.
But in doing so, she hits
her head directly on a rock.
>> Yeah, I don't
want to hurt you,
but I might have to
just a little bit.
It's a beauty, eh?
>> I don't want
it to be a beauty.
>> It us.
That's something you'll remember
every time you comb your hair.
>> There was a whole rock field
literally a foot below her,
two foot below her,
right where she stopped.
If she would have
tumbled one more time,
it would have been
dramatically worse.
So it's kind of a
blessing in disguise
that she stopped right there.
>> It's good that it's
oozing a little bit,
because it's keeping the
swelling down, you know?
OK.
>> That's cool-looking, though.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Yeah.
Checks the experience.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Checks the--
>> But it's red-- it's red
and white like those Indian
scarves.
>> Yeah.
>> Might be a little
pressure on that up there,
because it's longer than that.
>> Should I put my hat on
and keep the pressure on?
>> There you go.
That's a good idea.
OK.
>> Let me see that.
Let me look at you.
>> Oh, here, let me look at you.
Aw!
[LAUGHTER]
Such a gorgeous thing.
[LAUGHS]
>> Thanks.
>> Fortunately for Anna, Ryan
was able to stitch up her cut
for now as we take her off
to the nearest hospital.
It's a reminder to us
that our bodies and heads
are very fragile,
a reminder not lost
on Jen who's perplexed why
Jeff will not wear his helmet.
>> He's not wearing
his helmet again.
The mechanic's wearing it.
The mechanic lives in India.
Especially-- he knows
he needs a helmet.
>> Jeff is obviously
in his own world,
and again at odds with Jen.
[SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I used to love
the motorcycles.
>> There was a huge shift
in the group being together,
this camaraderie.
And for the first time
in the whole trip,
I felt like we were a unit.
Just that moment
that they all decided
to get into the same
space was so cool.
It was-- it was a nice shift.
>> Today, I had the
chance to ride with Mario.
And it was just a play today.
Really, first 10, 15
minutes I was getting
used to his speed,
which was a bit too,
let's say, aggressive
or too dynamic to me.
Then I did-- after
that, I settled down
and I really enjoyed.
It was just like through
the forest, nice roads.
And-- oh, perfect.
Because I heard the
other girls, they
said, oh, I would never
go this or that guy.
Just, I'm really open.
For example, Elana,
after today's trip,
she said, no way I'm going
to ride with Mark anymore.
I can see that Mark is a rock.
Sitting behind him, I
feel absolutely secure
and 100% safe.
She said, no way.
She had a terrible time today.
And she said, even
Mark mentioned
that he almost lost her twice.
>> As we continue onward on our
journey toward the third sacred
peak of Badrinath, there's
this constant ebb and flow
of amazing heightened
experience,
then reality smacking
us back in the face.
Anna's excitement,
then a cracked skull.
The unity of the group,
and Jeff and Jen at odds.
And Ken finally feeling
the mystical power
of the Himalayas, and then
a reminder of ignorance.
>> Within every human being,
there is this deep longing
to connect, to feel part
of something greater,
to give a deeper meaning to
life than this mundane surface
level.
It might begin with belief.
Then somewhere, the
belief has to end
and knowing has to begin.
So when belief ends, knowing
begins, that's spirituality.
An expansive, evolutionary,
fluid knowingness.
That knowing, that
is not the end.
That idea, oh, I
know, I get it all.
No.
It's fluid, it's humble,
and it's always in movement.
It's always learning.
It's always inclusive.
It's including everything.
Any teaching or any
idea is exclusive,
then it's originating
from a state of ignorance.
[SINGING]
[MUSIC- RAMA, "SEER OF THE
FIELD"]
>> (RAPPING) Stay humble or
the whole thing will crumble.
Never fumble, mumble,
or utter any ignorance.
Even when the path gets rocky,
rough, tough, and rigorous,
keep a vigorous.
Mind, body, and soul.
Apply devotion.
Let it burn and you'll
turn clay into gold.
>> This is really the
valley of the gods.
>> Oh, look at that.
>> Stunning.
>> Up here's so different.
Here, with these
other people, and you
can't be like that with
me and your family,
then something's wrong.
>> Sometimes I feel like, am I
the only one that has to change
here?
You know, it's a two-way road.
>> (RAPPING) There's
no limitation.
Use the blood, sweat, and
tears as a new foundation.
The duration is endless.
Life's a work in progress.
Just focus on the craft.
Success comes regardless.
You ain't just an artist.
You're a king of a queen, or a
queen of a king with a dream,
doing your thing.
Life's your greatest
masterpiece.
Own it.
Don't get mad when
people start to clone it.
Keep balance.
Don't let flattery make
what you build tumble.
Stay humble or the whole
thing will crumble.
Never fumble, mumble,
or utter any ignorance,
even when the path gets rocky.